When Amber Ware started working at her husband's electrical business three years ago, she quickly introduced Macintosh computers into the office.

“It totally changed our business: the way we work, the way we invoice and the way we communicate with staff,” Ware says.

Electrix all Blew, on Sydney's northern beaches, transformed from a paper-based office to an electronic one. The electricians stay in touch and send invoices via iPads as soon as they leave a job, helping to improve cash flow and slashing paperwork.

All this could have been done on Windows computers, but Ware says it was much easier with Macs. They have an intuitive operating system that is easy to learn, she says, and the software is much easier to install.

“It takes out all the confusing steps that a PC has,” Ware says. “It holds your hand through every single step of the way.”

She also chose Apples because she'd used them at her previous job in marketing and had been impressed with the iPod.

Apple products attract a loyal following among small business owners and other users, but they lag far behind Windows computers in popularity.

Among the 4.2 million personal computers (desktops and laptops) sold in Australia last year, Apple was the second most popular brand, with a 16 per cent market share, data from IT research company Gartner shows. That means the remaining 84 per cent were Windows-based.

These figures are for all personal computers sold, but IT consultants say Windows computers are far more popular among small businesses than Macs.

Dexter Eugenio, who works as an IT consultant to SMEs and does regular podcasts on The Small Business IT Show, advises small businesses to use the Windows operating system.

“Windows is still the way to go,” he says. “The software that is getting written now is still almost always for Windows first, before it gets ported off to another operating system.”

And a lot of the Windows software, such as Microsoft Office, is the business standard, making it much easier to share documents with other businesses and lowering the chance of files not formatting correctly on different computers.

Finally, Windows computers are a lot cheaper than Macs. A MacBook Air – the Apple equivalent of the laptop – starts at about $1000, whereas a Windows laptop can be bought for about half that price.

Andrew Egan, of Melbourne's Adept IT, says that because PCs and laptops are so much more prevalent they are also cheaper to maintain. Parts for these computers have become commoditised, so there's a wide choice, and the prices are lower than for Mac parts, he says. “It's much more locked down with the Macs and there's much less choice,” he says.

For SME owners who like to take care of their own IT problems and needs, there's also a lot more information and support available than for Apple computers.

Justin Palasty used PCs through school and university and saw no reason to switch when he started his Sydney design and construction company Formacon Building in 2011.

Along with familiarity and ease of use is the fact that a lot of building industry software isn't available for Apple computers.

“PCs allowed us more flexibility in the decisions that we made around our software,” Palasty says.

“PCs are more of an open platform as compared to a Mac. You can change the programs more easily than Apple, which has more restrictive guidelines and rules about what you can and can't do.”

Finally, PCs are cheaper, he says.

That doesn't mean that Apple products don't have advantages.

First, while they cost more, they retain much more of their value at resale than Windows computers.

Apple products are also much more resistant to viruses than PCs, says Eugenio, due to their unique operating system – many users say they've never had the sort of problems that can plague Windows computers.

So, while a Mac technician might be more expensive than an expert in Windows, small business owners who choose Apple computers may need less support.

They are also considered to be better for anyone working in detail with images, such as graphic designers or web designers, because they have a much higher screen resolution and often run graphics programs better.

As for what's next, the rise of cloud computing means there will be less of a difference between Apple and Windows PCs, Eugenio says. As computers increasingly use internet-based software, it will matter less and less which operating system they run on.
